There's a distinction generally speaking between gradual versus sudden notions of realization or awakening and this can seem totally paradoxical to people, so i'm gonna read you a bit about this and you'd get a bit of my background here.

"We wouldn't attempt to meditate or engage in any other contemplative practice if we didn't feel that something about our experience needed to be improved but here lies one of the central paradoxes of spiritual life because this very feeling of dissatisfaction causes us to overlook the intrinsic freedom of consciousness in the present. There are good reasons to believe that adopting a practice like meditation can lead to positive changes in one's life, but the deepest goal of spirituality is freedom from the illusion of the self.

And to seek such freedom as though if were future state to be attained through effort is to reinforce the chains of one's apparent bondage in each moment. Traditionally, there have been two solutions to this paradox. One is to simply ignore it and to adopt various techniques of meditation in the hope that a breakthrough will occur. Some people appear to succeed at this, but many fail. It is true that good things often happen in the meantime, we can become happier and more concentrated, but we can also despair of the whole project, the words of the sages may begin to sound like empty promises and we're left hoping for transcendent experiences that never arrive or prove merely temporary. The ultimate wisdom of enlightenment, whatever it is, cannot be a matter of having fleeting experiences. The goal of meditation is to uncover a form of well-being that is inherent to the nature of our minds. It must therefore be available in the context of ordinary sights, sounds, sensations and even thoughts. Peak experiences are fine, but real freedom must be coincident with normal awakening life."

And as a sidebar to this, this is now me speaking off-book, this is one of the crucial distinctions between meditation and psychedelics as tools. It's very easy to draw the lesson from psychedelic experiences, however useful, that freedom somehow lies in radically transforming the contents and character of consciousness, whereas the goal of meditation is to recognize that there's something about ordinary consciousness, the very awareness in you that is experiencing the sound of my voice in this moment, there's already radically free of self, it's already open, it's already undefined, consciousness is never truly confined by its content and so while psychedelics have been very useful for me and many others the center of the bullseye for me is something that is actually coincident with, normal waking consciousness. I mean precisely the kind of consciousness that could allow you to safely drive a car, right, which if you've ever taken acid or mushrooms, it's not where one tends to be pitched on those drugs. So back to the text.

"The other traditional response to the paradox of spiritual seeking is to fully acknowledge it and concede that all efforts are doomed, because the urge to attain self-transcendence or any other mystical experience is a symptom of the very disease we want to cure. There's nothing to do but give up the search. These paths may appear antithetical and they're often presented as such. The path of gradual ascent is typical of Theravada Buddhism and most other approaches to meditation in the Indian tradition, and gradualism is the natural starting point for any search, spiritual or otherwise.

Such goal-oriented modes of practice have the virtue of being easily taught because a person can begin them without having had any fundamental insight into the nature of consciousness or the illusoriness of the self. He need only adopt new patterns of attention. thought and behavior and the path will unfold before him.

By contrast the path of sudden realization can appear impossibly steep. Is often described as "non-dualistic" because it refuses to validate the point of view from which one would meditate or practice any other spiritual discipline. Consciousness is already free of anything that remotely resembles a self and there's nothing you can do as an illusionary ego to realize this.

Such a prospective can be found in the Indian Tradition of Advaita Vedanta and in a few schools of Buddhism. Those who begin to practice in the spirit of gradualism often assume that the goal of self-transcendence is far away and they may spend years overlooking the very freedom they yearn to realize.

The liability of this approach became clear to me when I studied under the Burmese meditation master Sayadaw U Pandita. I sat through several retreats with U Pandita, each a month or two in length. These retreats were based on the monastic discipline of Theravadan Buddhism. We did not eat after noon and were encouraged to sleep no more than four hours each night hourly. The goal was to engage in 18 hours of formal meditation each day.

Inwardly, it was to follow the stages of insight laid out in Buddhaghosa's 5th century treatise, the Visuddhimagga, and elaborated in the writings of Upandita's own legendary teacher Mahasi Sayadaw. The logic of this practice is explicitly goal-oriented. According to this view one practices mindfulness, not because the intrinsic freedom of consciousness can be fully realized in the present but because being mindful is a means for attaining an experience often described as "cessation", which is thought to decisively uproot the illusion of the self along with other mental afflictions depending on one's stage practice.

Cessation is believed to be a direct insight into an unconditioned reality, in Pali this is called Nibbana in Sanskrit Nirvana, that lies behind all manifest phenomena. This conception of the path to enlightenment is open to several criticisms: the first is that it is misleading with respect to what can be realized in the present moment in a state of ordinary awareness Thus, it encourages confusion at the outset regarding the nature of the problem one is trying to solve.

It is true, however, that striving toward the distant goal of enlightenment as well as the nearal goal of cessation can lead one to practice with an intensity that might otherwise be difficult to achieve. I never made more effort than I did when practicing under U Pandita, but most of this effort arose from the very illusion of bondage to the self that I was seeking to overcome.

The model of this practice is that one must climb the mountain so that freedom can be found at the top but the self is already an illusion and that truth can be glimpsed directly at the mountains base or anywhere else along the path one can then return to this insight again and again as one's sole method of meditation, thereby arriving at the goal in each moment of actual practice.

This isn't merely a matter of choosing to think differently about the significance of mindfulness, it is a difference in what one is able to be mindful of. Dualistic mindfulness, paying attention to the breath for instance, generally proceeds on the basis of an illusion. One feels that one is a subject, a locus of consciousness inside the head that can strategically pay attention to the breath or to some other object of awareness because of all the good that it will do. This is gradualism in action and yet from a non-dualistic point of view one could just as well be mindful of selflessness directly.

To do this however one must recognize that this is how consciousness is and such an insight can be difficult to achieve. However it does not require the meditative attainment of cessation. Another problem with the goal of cessation is that most traditions of Buddhism do not share it and yet they produce long lineages of contemplative masters, many of whom have spent decades doing nothing but meditating on the nature of consciousness. If freedom is possible there must be some mode of ordinary consciousness in which it can be expressed. Why not realize this frame of mind directly.

Nevertheless, I spent several years deeply preoccupied with reaching the goal of cessation, at least one year of that time was spent on silent retreat. Although I had many interesting experiences, none seemed to fit the specific requirements of this path. There were periods during which all thoughts subsided and any sense of having a body disappeared. What remained was a blissful expanse of conscious peace that had no reference point in any of the usual sensory channels. Many scientists and philosophers believe that consciousness is always tied to one of the five senses, that the idea of "pure consciousness" apart from seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting and touching is a category error and a spiritual fantasy.

I am confident that they are mistaken. But cessation never arrived. Given my gradualist views at that point, this became very frustrating. Most of my time on retreat was extremely pleasant but it seemed to me that I had been merely given the tools with which to contemplate the evidence of my non-enlightenment.

My practice had become a vigil. A method of waiting, however patiently, for a future reward. The pendulum swung when I met an Indian teacher named H. W. L. Poonja called Poonjaji or Papaji by his students. Poonjaji was a disciple of Ramana Maharshi arguably the most widely revered Indian sage of the 20th century.

Ramana own awakening had been quite unusual because he had no apparent spiritual interest or contact with a teacher. As a boy of 16 living in a middle class family of South Indian brahmans, he spontaneously became a spiritual adept. While sitting alone in his uncle's study, Ramana suddenly became paralyzed by a fear of death.

He lay down on the floor convinced that he would soon die. But rather than remaining terrified, he decided to locate the self that was about to disappear. He focused on the feeling of I, a process he later called self-inquiry and found it to be absent from the field of consciousness.

Ramana the person didn't die that day, but he claimed that the feeling of being a separate self never darkened his consciousness again. After fruitlessly attempting to behave like the ordinary boy he had once been, Romano left home and traveled to Tiruvannamalai, an ancient pilgrimage site for followers of Shiva.

He spent the rest of his life there in proximity to the mountain Arunachala with which he claimed to have a mystical connection. In the early years after his awakening, Ramana seemed to lose his ability to speak and he was said to grow so absorbed in his experience of transfigured consciousness that he remained motionless for days at a time.

His body grew weak, developed sores and had to be tended by the few locals who had taken an interest in him. After a decade of silence around 1906 Ramana began to conduct dialogs about the nature of consciousness. Until the end of his life a steady stream of students came to study with him.

These are the sorts of things he was apt to say. He's a quotes from Ramona Maharshi:
"The mind is a bundle of thoughts. The thoughts arise because there is the thinker. The thinker is the ego. The ego if sought will automatically vanish." Here's another quote: "Reality is simply the loss of the ego, destroy the ego by seeking this identity. Because ego is no entity it will automatically vanish and reality will shine forth by itself. This is the direct method, whereas all other methods are done only retaining the ego. No sadhanas - spiritual practices - are necessary for engaging in this quest."

And finally, here's one more quote.

"There's no mystery greater than this that being reality we seek to gain reality.
We think that there is something hiding our reality and it must be destroyed before the reality is gained. It is ridiculous. A day will dawn on when you will laugh at your past efforts. That which will be on the day you laugh is also here and now."

Back to my text, any attempt to make sense of such teachings in third person scientific terms quickly produces monstrosities. From the point of view of psychological science, for instance the mind is not just a "bundle of thoughts". And In what sense can reality be quote simply the loss of the ego? Does this reality include quasars and hantavirus?

But these are the kinds of quibbles that will cause one to miss Romano's point. While the philosophy of Advaita, that's the word for non-dualism in Sanskrit, while the philosophy of Advaita and Ramona's own words may tend to support a metaphysical reading of teachings of this kind, their validity is not metaphysical. Rather it is experiential. The whole of Advaita reduces to a series of very simple and testable assertions. Consciousness is the prior condition of every experience. The self or ego is an illusory appearance within it. Look closely for what you are calling "I" and the feeling of being a separate self will disappear.

What remains? As a matter of experience is a field of consciousness, free, undivided and intrinsically uncontaminated by its ever-changing contents. These are the simple truths that Poonjaji taught. In fact he was even more uncompromising than his guru in his nonduality. Whereas Romano would often conceived the utility of certain dualistic practices, Poonjaji never gave an inch.

The effect was intoxicating especially to those of us who spent years practicing meditation. Poonjaji was also given to spontaneous balance of weeping and laughter, both apparently from sheer joy. The man did not hide his light under a bushel. When I first met him, he had not yet been discovered by the throngs of western devotees would soon turn his tiny house Into a spiritual circus. Like his teacher Ramana, Poonjaji claimed to be perfectly free from the illusion of the self. And by all appearances he was. And like Ramana and every other Indian guru, Poonjaji would occasionally say something deeply unscientific. On the whole however his teaching was remarkably free from Hindu religiosity or unwarranted assertions about the nature of the cosmos.

He appeared to simply speak from experience about the nature of experience itself. Poonjaji's influence on me was profound, especially because it came as a corrective to all the strenuous and unsatisfying efforts I'd been making in meditation up until that point. But the dangers inherent to his approach soon became obvious.

The all or nothing quality of Poonjaji cheese teaching obliged him to acknowledge the full enlightenment of any person who was grandiose or manic enough to claim it. Thus, I repeatedly witnessed fellow students declare their complete and undying freedom all the while appearing quite ordinary or worse. In certain cases, these people had clearly had some sort of breakthrough but Poonjaji's insistence upon the finality of every legitimate insight led many of them to delude themselves about their spiritual attainment.

Some left India and became gurus. From what I could tell Poonjaji gave everyone his blessing to spread his teachings in this way. He once suggested that I do it and yet it was clear to me that I was not qualified to be anyone's guru. Nearly 20 years have passed and I'm still not.

Of course from Poonjaji's point of view this is an illusion. Any yet there simply is a difference between a person like myself who is generally distracted by thought and one who isn't and cannot be. I don't know where to place Poonjaji on this continuum of wisdom, but he appeared to be a lot farther along than his students.

Whether Poonjaji was capable of seeing the difference between himself and other people I do not know. That his insistence that no difference existed began to seem dogmatic or delusional. On one occasion events conspired to perfectly illuminate the flaw in Poonjaji's teaching. A small group of experienced practitioners, among us several teachers of meditation, had organized a trip to India and Nepal to spend 10 days with Poonjaji in Lucknow followed by 10 days in Kathmandu to receive teachings on the Tibetan Buddhist practice of Dzogchen. As it happened during our time in Lucknow, a woman from Switzerland became "enlightened" in Poonjaji's presence. For the better part of a week, she was celebrated as something akin to the next Buddha. Poonjaji repeatedly put her forward as evidence of how fully the truth could be realized without making any effort at all in meditation and we had the pleasure of seeing this woman sit beside Poonjaji's raised platform expanding upon how blissful it now was in her corner of the universe. She was in fact radiantly happy and it was by no means clear that Poonjaji had made a mistake in recognizing her. She would say things like "there's nothing but consciousness and there's no difference between it and reality itself". Coming from such a nice gialous person there was little reason to doubt the profundity of her experience.

When it came time for our group to leave India for Nepal this woman asked if she could join us. Because she was such good company, we encouraged her to come along. A few of us were also curious to see how her realization would appear in another context. And so it came to pass that the woman who's enlightenment had just been confirmed by one of the greatest living exponents of Advaita was in the room when we received our first teachings from Tulku Urgyen Rinpoche who was generally thought to be one of the greatest living Dzogchen masters. Of all the Buddhist Teachings, those of Dzogchen most closely resemble the teachings of Advaita. The two traditions seek to provoke the same insight into the non-duality of consciousness. Generally speaking only Dzogchen makes it absolutely clear that one must practice this insight to the point of stability and that one can do so without succumbing to the dualistic striving that haunts most other paths.

