In his apology, Plato attributes the now famous words, to Socrates: "The unexamined life is not worth living." and whether or not that is strictly true, the unexamined life is certainly needlessly painful, both for oneself and for others. And painful or not, the unexamined life is certainly less interesting. We really spend our lives learning how to live, and this isn't necessarily as absurd or as tragic as it sounds. Most of us find a pattern of living that makes approximate sense and we tinker with it for decades. 

If you're lucky, you'll discover that you can live more or less the way you want, but even if you're lucky, you'll find out that it's possible to want the wrong things, to be lured into squandering your time and attention, to be bewitched in a way by things that don't really matter. Even if you're lucky, happiness can be surprisingly ellusive. So why meditate? The basic logic is quite simple: the quality of your mind determines the quality of your life. happiness and suffering, no matter how extreme, are mental events. The mind depends upon the body, of course, and the body upon the world, but everything good or bad that happens in your life must appear in consciousness to matter. This fact offers ample opportunity to make the best of bad situations, because changing how you respond to the world is often as good as changing the world. Of course, you can try to change the world, you can try to get everyone around you to behave exactly as you want, you can try to never get sick or injured, you can try to keep your favourite possesions from getting damaged and lost, but try as hard as you might, the sources of stress and disappointment and self-doubt will always be there. Happily, there is another game to play, and not everyone knows about it. 

Rather than try to change the world in each moment, there is another move open to you. You can look more closely at what you're doing with your own mind and actually cease to respond to life in ways that produce needless suffering for yourself and for others. When we're lost in thought, there's certain things we tend not to notice about the nature of our mind. For instance, every thought or feeling you've ever had, good or bad, has arisen and then passed away. The anger you felt yesterday or a year ago isn't here anymore, and if it arrises again based on your thinking about the past, it will once again pass away when you're no longer thinking about it. This is a profoundly important truth about the mind and it can be absolutely liberating to understand it deeply. If you do understand it deeply, that is, if you're able to pay clear attention to the arrising of an emotion like anger, rather than thinking about why you have all the right to be angry, it actually becomes impossible to stay angry for more than a few moments at a time. 

If you think you can stay angry for a day, or even an hour, without continually manufacturing this emotion by thinking without knowing that you're thinking, you are mistaken. This is an objective claim about the mechanics of your own subjectivity, and I invite you to test it, and meditation is the tool you would use to test it. Now why I can't promise that meditation will keep you from ever becoming angry again, you can learn not to stay angry or fearful or embarrassed for very long. And when talking about the consequences of negative emotions in the real world and in your life, the difference between moments and hours or days and weeks is impossible to exagerate. Now this is not to say that external circumstances don't matter, but it is your mind, rather than the circumstances themselves that determines the quality of your life. Some people are content in the midst of real deprivation and danger, while others are miserable despite having all the luck in the world. And there are practices that allow us to break this habit of being lost in thought and to simply become aware of our experience in the present moment. And the main one I am teaching in this course is a technique known as Vipassana, which is generally translated as Insight Meditation and this comes from the oldest tradition of Buddhism known as Theravada. The quality of mind cultivated in Vipassana practice is almost always referred as mindfulness. 

There is nothing spooky about mindfulness, it's simply a state of clear non-judgemental and undistracted attention to the contents of consciousness, whether pleasant or unpleasant. This practice has been shown to produce long lasting changes in attention, emotion, cognition and pain perception, and these correlate with both structural and functional changes in the brain. Mindfulness is now very much in vogue, of course, but it seems to me that there are still many misconceptions about it. It's often taught and marketed as thought it was merely an improved version of an executive stress ball, when it's really more like a large hadron collider, that is, it's a method for making profound discoveries, in this case about the nature of our own minds. And there's nothing passive about mindfulness, you can even say it expresses a certain kind of passion, a passion for discerning what is subjectively real in each moment. Being mindful is not a matter of thinking more clearly about experience, it's the act of experiencing more clearly, including the arrising of thoughts themselves. One of the great strengths of this technique of meditation, from a secular point of view, is that it doesn't require us to adopt any cultural affectation or unjustified beliefs. It simply demands that we pay close attention to the flow of our experience in each moment. 

So as you progress through this course, notice that what you're being asked to do, more and more, is to simply recognize what is already arrising in consciousness in each moment, without modifying it, without grasping what is pleasant or pushing what's unpleasant away. In some basic sense, meditation is the act of doing less than you normally do, it's the act of being less distracted in the midst of already happening on its own, and once one is less distracted one finally has a tool with which to notice truths about one's mind that otherwise would never be discovered directly.
